docs: audit log provider (#2049)
pankod/refine: documentation/docs/core/providers/audit-log-provider.md

---
id: audit-log-provider
title: Audit Log Provider
---

## Overview

> **refine** provides Audit Log support via `auditLogProvider`. A new log record is automatically created when a new record is created, updated and deleted. You can access these records from anywhere via hooks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**refine** provides Audit Log support via `auditLogProvider`. A new log record is automatically created when a new record is created, updated and deleted. You can access these records from anywhere via hooks. You can also manually create or update an audit-log via hooks.
```

> Complete all this by writing an `audit-log-provider` to **refine**. This provider must include following methods:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Complete all this by writing an `auditLogProvider` to **refine**. This provider must include following methods:
```

```ts
const auditLogProvider = {
    create: (params: {
        resource: string;
        action: string;
        data?: any;
        author?: {
            name?: string;
            [key: string]: any;
        };
        previousData?: any;

>         meta: Record<number | string, any>;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        meta?: Record<number | string, any>;
```

    }) => void;
    get: (params: {
        resource: string;
        action?: string;
        meta?: Record<number | string, any>;
        author?: Record<number | string, any>;
        metaData?: MetaDataQuery;
    }) => Promise<any>;
    update: (params: {
        id: BaseKey;
        name: string;
    }) => Promise<any>;
}
```

:::note
**refine** uses these methods in [`useLog`](/core/hooks/audit-log/useLog.md) and [`useLogList`](/core/hooks/audit-log/useLogList.md).
:::

## Usage

> You must pass a audit log provider to the `auditLogProvider` prop of `<Refine>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must pass an `auditLogProvider` prop to `<Refine>`.
```

```tsx title="App.tsx"
import { Refine } from "@pankod/refine-core";

import auditLogProvider from "./auditLogProvider";

const App: React.FC = () => {
    return <Refine auditLogProvider={auditLogProvider} />;
};
```

> ## Creating a audit log provider

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Creating an audit log provider
```

Now let's prepare an example audit log provider using the `https://api.fake-rest.refine.dev/logs` end-point.

### `get`

This method is used to get audit logs. Expects audit logs to be returned with the given parameters. Here we return activities using `resource` and `meta` data.

```ts title="auditLogProvider.ts"
const auditLogProvider: AuditLogProvider = {
    get: async ({ resource, meta }) => {

>         const { data } = await dataProvider(API_URL).getList({

Reviewer 2: here we should tell the data provider more

            resource: "logs",
            filters: [
                {
                    field: "resource",
                    operator: "eq",
                    value: resource,
                },
                {
                    field: "meta.id",
                    operator: "eq",
                    value: meta?.id,
                },
            ],
        });

        return data;
    },
};
```

#### Parameter Types

| Name     | Type                  |
| -------- | --------------------- |
| resource | `string`              |
| action   | `string`              |
| meta     | `Record<string, any>` |
| author   | `Record<string, any>` |

### `create`

> This method is triggered when a new log is created. The incoming parameters contain the data we need and we need to return a Promise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This method is triggered when a new log is created or when you use `useLog`'s `log` method. The incoming parameters show the values of the new record to be created.
```

:::important

> We recommend that you create audit logs server-side. So when the user performs an action (create, createMany, update, updateMany, delete and deleteMany), we recommend that you do it on the API side.

Reviewer 2: The explanation is repetitive. We can explain why.

:::

```ts title="auditLogProvider.ts"
const auditLogProvider: AuditLogProvider = {
    create: (params) => {
        return dataProvider(API_URL).create({
            resource: "logs",
            variables: params,
        });
    },
};
```

When we test, we will see that an object like the one below is created in the `logs` resource.

```json
[
  {
    "action": "create",
    "resource": "posts",
    "data": {
      "title": "Test",
      "category": {
        "id": 1
      },
      "status": "published",
      "content": "Test Content"
    },
    "meta": {
      "id": 1001
    },
    "timestamp": "2022-06-22T10:04:47.157Z",
    "id": 1
  }
]
```

:::important

> The `id` of the record created in the `meta` object is added. It is used for filtering purposes.

Reviewer 2: Do we need to talk about the filtering part?

                    operator: "eq",
                    value: meta?.id,
                },
            ],
        });

        return data;
    },****
};
```

#### Parameter Types

| Name                                                                                                | Type                  | Description                          |
| --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------- | ------------------------------------ |
| <div className="required-block"><div>resource</div> <div className=" required">Required</div></div> | `string`              | Resource name that it reads from URL |
| action                                                                                              | `string`              | Action name                          |
| meta                                                                                                | `Record<string, any>` | Record info                          |
| author                                                                                              | `Record<string, any>` | Author info                          |

### `create`

> This method is triggered when a new log is created or when you use `useLog`'s `log` method. The incoming parameters show the values of the new record to be created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This method is triggered when a new successful mutation or when you use `useLog`'s `log` method. The incoming parameters show the values of the new record to be created.
```

:::important

> We recommend that you create audit logs on the server side for cors security concern. Because data can be changed on the client-side.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We recommend you create `Audit logs` on the API side for security concerns because data can be changed on the client side.
```

:::

```ts title="auditLogProvider.ts"
const auditLogProvider: AuditLogProvider = {
    create: (params) => {
        return dataProvider(API_URL).create({
            resource: "logs",
            variables: params,
        });
    },
};
```

> When we test, we will see that an object like the one below is created in the `logs` resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a successful create mutation, the `create` method will be called with the following parameters.
```

> ```json

Reviewer 2: we can make two tabs here, like usage and output

https://refine.dev/docs/guides-and-concepts/data-provider/graphql/#list-page

    "resource": "posts",
    "data": {
        "title": "Title",
        "status": "published",
        "content": "New Post Content"
    },
    "meta": {
        "id": 1,
        "foo": "bar"
    }
}
```

:::tip
`metaData` is included in `meta`.
:::

### useUpdate

When `useUpdate` is called, `refine` sends the following parameters to auditLogProvider's `create` method.

```ts
const { mutate } = useUpdate();
mutate({
    id: 1,
    resource: "posts",
    values: {
        title: "Updated New Title",
    },
});
```

```json
{
    "action": "update",
    "resource": "posts",
    "data": {
        "title": "Updated New Title",
        "status": "published",
        "content": "New Post Content"
    },
    "previousData": {
        "title": "Title",
        "status": "published",
        "content": "New Post Content"
    },
    "meta": {
        "id": 1
    }
}
```

### useDelete

When `useDelete` is called, `refine` sends the following parameters to auditLogProvider's `create` method.

```ts
const { mutate } = useDelete();
mutate({
    id: 1,
    resource: "posts",
});
```

```json
{
    "action": "delete",
    "resource": "posts",
    "meta": {
        "id": 1
    }
}
```
<br/>

> ## Manage

Author: Maybe a better title?

Reviewer: `Manage Log Permissions` is it good? 😅

Reviewer 2: `Enable for specific mutations type` is it good? 👀

Author: > `Manage Log Permissions` is it good? 😅

```
options: {
    auditLog: {
        permissions: ["create"],
    },
},
```

@salihozdemir We can change `permission` keyword.

---
id: audit-log-provider
title: Audit Log Provider
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

## Overview

**refine** provides Audit Log support via `auditLogProvider`. A new log record is automatically created when a new record is created, updated and deleted. You can access these records from anywhere via hooks. You can also manually create or update an audit-log via hooks.

> Complete all this by writing an `auditLogProvider` to **refine**. This provider must include following methods:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Complete all this by writing an `auditLogProvider` to **refine**. This provider must include the following methods:
```

        author?: Record<number | string, any>;
        metaData?: MetaDataQuery;
    }) => Promise<any>;
    update: (params: {
        id: BaseKey;
        name: string;
    }) => Promise<any>;
}
```

:::note
**refine** uses these methods in [`useLog`](/core/hooks/audit-log/useLog.md) and [`useLogList`](/core/hooks/audit-log/useLogList.md).
:::

## Usage

You must pass an `auditLogProvider` prop to `<Refine>`.

```tsx title="App.tsx"
import { Refine } from "@pankod/refine-core";

import auditLogProvider from "./auditLogProvider";

const App: React.FC = () => {
    return <Refine auditLogProvider={auditLogProvider} />;
};
```

## Creating an audit log provider

For this example, we will use the [`logs`](https://api.fake-rest.refine.dev/logs) end-point from [json-server](https://api.fake-rest.refine.dev) for this data. So we can use the methods of the `dataProvider`.

### `get`

This method is used to get audit logs. Expects audit logs to be returned with the given parameters. Here we return activities using `resource` and `meta` data.

```ts title="auditLogProvider.ts"
const auditLogProvider: AuditLogProvider = {
    get: async ({ resource, meta }) => {

>         const { data } = await dataProvider(API_URL).getList({

Reviewer 2: we must show how we defined dataProvider
